MiniDafny (#6)
dafny-lang/compiler-bootstrap: doc/proofs/induction-principle.md

# Defining and using an induction principle in Dafny

This note explores a way of factorizing proofs when writing a collection of lemmas about a
single function, by means of an *induction principle*. This proof technique was identified
when working on [Dafny-in-Dafny](https://github.com/dafny-lang/compiler-bootstrap), which
we will use as a motivating example.

## Problem: proving lemmas about an interpreter

In the context of verifying a compiler, we need to introduce q semantics for the compiled
language. We can do so by defining a function `InterpExpr(e: Expr, st: State):
Result<(Value, State), Error>`, which given an expression and an initial state either
returns an error (division by zero, access to an undefined variable, etc.) or returns the
value this expression evaluates to, together with the new state in which the execution
terminates.

> Verifying the compiler then requires to repeatedly state and prove lemmas about this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verifying the compiler then requires us to repeatedly state and prove lemmas about this
```

`InterpExpr` function. For instance, given a transformation `TR: (Expr) -> Expr`, we might
express the correctness of the transformation as (the new program fails no more often that
the original one, and evaluates to the same result):

```dafny
forall e, st :: InterpExpr(e, st).Success? ==> InterpExpr(e, st) == InterpExpr(TR(e), st)
```

> Such a lemma has to be proven by induction over `e` for all the transformations we wish to

Reviewer: I see now that you mentioned that below, but it would be good to rephrase here

verify, and its proof generally follows very closely the structure of `InterpExpr`. This is
for instance the case for the following local rewriting:

```dafny
0 * e  -->  0       when e is pure
```

> Moreover, verifying this rewriting requires to prove the following auxiliary lemma (for the appropriate

Reviewer: `requires proving` or `requires us to prove`

definition of `IsPure`), which again, mentions `InterpExpr`:

```dafny
forall e, st ::
  IsPure(e) ==>
    match InterpExpr(e, st)
      case Success((_, st')) => st' == st // state is unchanged
      case Failure => true
```

**Rem.:** if the AST contains loops, the proofs can't be performed *only* by induction on the
syntax. If we use a notion of fuel, we need to do the induction also on the fuel. Let's consider
we don't have loops for now.

> The issue we encounter here is that we have a lot (more) of lemmas to prove about a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issue we encounter here is that we have a lot of lemmas to prove about a single
```

function, `InterpExpr`. However, whenever we need to prove such a lemma in Dafny, we need
more or less to copy/paste the whole `InterpExpr` definition because the structure of the

> proof follows the structure of this function. This process is time and effort consuming,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proof follows the structure of this function. This process is time consuming,
```

leads to big proofs which are hard to maintain, and is error prone as we are blind while

> instantiating function calls and lemmas calls (in particular, it is very easy to mix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instantiating function calls and lemmas calls (in particular, it is very easy to mix up
```

variable indices).

For instance, let's look at the correctness proof for the ``IsPure`` predicate, that we introduce
below:

```dafny

> predicate method IsPure_WithLocals(locals: set<string>, e: Expr)

Reviewer: Make `locals`
```suggestion
predicate method IsPure(e: Expr, locals: set<string> := {})
```

And then you don't need the other definition

  decreases e
  // `locals`: the set of local variables which have been introduced by outer
  // let-bindings (if the sub-expression `e` only updates those variables then
  // the ancestor expression is pure, because those variables don't escape its scope).
{
  match e
    case Var(name) => true
    case Literal(n) => true
    case Bind(bvar, bval, body) =>
      && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, bval)
      && IsPure_WithLocals({bvar} + locals, body)
    case Assign(avar, aval) =>
      avar in locals && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, aval)
    case If(cond, thn, els) =>
      && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, cond)
      && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, thn)
      && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, els)
    case Op(op, oe1, oe2) =>
      IsPure_WithLocals(locals, oe1) && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, oe2)
    case Seq(e1, e2) =>
      IsPure_WithLocals(locals, e1) && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, e2)
}

predicate method IsPure(e: Expr)
{
  IsPure_WithLocals({}, e)
}
```

We want to prove the following theorem:

> <a name="interpexpr-pure"></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a id="interpexpr-pure"></a>
```

```dafny
lemma InterpExpr_Pure(e: Expr, ctx: Context)
  requires Pure.IsPure(e)
  ensures
    match InterpExpr(e, ctx)
      case Success((_, ctx')) => ctx' == ctx // state is unchanged
      case Failure => true
```

This theorem can be deduced from the following intermediate lemma, that we prove by
induction on the expression `e`:

```dafny

> lemma InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals(e: Expr, locals: set<string>, ctx: Context)

Reviewer: Is `Context` defined somewhere?

  requires IsPure_WithLocals(locals, e)
  requires ctx.Keys >= locals
  ensures
    match InterpExpr(e, ctx)
      case Success((_, ctx')) =>
        && ctx'.Keys == ctx.Keys
        // We only update variables captured by outer let-bindings

>         && forall x | x in ctx.Keys && x !in locals :: ctx'[x] == ctx[x]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        && ctx - locals == ctx' - locals
```
?

      case Failure => true
```

Let's consider the `Seq` case. In our AST, we define sequences as follows:

```dafny
datatype Expr =
  | Seq(e1: Expr, e2: Expr)
  | ... // Omitted
```

And the interpreter is defined on sequences as follows:

```dafny

> type Context = map<string, int> // A context is a map from strings to values

Reviewer: Move this up

function method InterpExpr(e: Expr, ctx: Context): Result<(int, Context)> {
  match e
    case Seq(e1, e2) =>
      var (_, ctx1) :- InterpExpr(e1, ctx); // Evaluate the first expression
      InterpExpr(e2, ctx1) // Continue

    // Omitted
    case ... =>
      ...
}
```

We face the problem that the proof of the `Seq` case requires to introduce the same
intermediate values as the ones manipulated by the interpreter (like `ctx1`), so that we
can *write* the recursive calls to `InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals` (which give us our
induction hypotheses):

```dafny
lemma InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals ... {
  match e
    case Seq(e1, e2) =>
      var res1 := InterpExpr(e1, ctx); // Duplicates the interpreter
      InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals(e1, locals, ctx); // *Recursive call*

>       if res1.Success? { // Not even present in the interpreter!

Reviewer: Wasn't it? (there the `:-` operator)

        var (_, ctx1) := res1.value; // Duplicates the interpreter
        InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals(e2, locals, ctx1); // *Recursive call*
      }
      else {} // Trivial case

    case ... =>
      ...
}
```

As a result, the proof above basically duplicates the code of the interpreter. This is
true for all the cases of `Expr`, and has to be done for all the lemmas we prove about the
interpreter, leading to obvious scalability issues.

> **Rem.:** the full proof without the induction principle is defined in the `PureNoInductionPrinciple`

Reviewer: Give the path to this

module. It is particularly interesting in the context of incrementally expanding the language,
to compare the effort needed to update the proofs, depending on whether those proofs use
the induction principle or not (see the [corresponding section](#section-increments)).

## Our solution: defining an induction principle

### First version of the induction principle - verifying `Pure`

If you look carefully at the proof of `InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals` in the previous
section, you will notice that the only important lines of code are the recursive calls
applied on `e1` and `e2`. The remaining lines simply introduce variables like `ctx1` so

> that we can actually *write* those calls. We might want to factorize this structure once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that we can actually *write* those calls. We might want to factor out this structure once
```

and for all.

Let's introduce a predicate for the property we want to prove:

> <a name="p-predicate"></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a id="p-predicate"></a>
```

```dafny
predicate P(locals: set<string>, ctx: Context, e: Expr)
{
  // The precondition of ``InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals``:
  IsPure_WithLocals(locals, e) ==>
  ctx.Keys >= locals ==>
  // The postcondition of ``InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals``:
  match InterpExpr(e, ctx)
    case Success((_, ctx')) =>
      && ctx'.Keys == ctx.Keys
      && forall x | x in ctx.Keys && x !in locals :: ctx'[x] == ctx[x]
    case Failure => true
}
```

We can then isolate the proof step we do for the `Seq` case in the following lemma:

> <a name="ind-step-seq-forall"></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a id="ind-step-seq-forall"></a>
```

We can write similar lemmas for the other cases of `Expr`, and finally make the final
proof by induction in the following manner:

<a name="interp-expr-pure-withlocals"></a>
```dafny
lemma InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals(e: Expr)
  ensures forall locals, ctx :: P(locals, ctx, e)
{
  match e
    case Seq(e1, e2) =>
      // Induction hypothesis for `e1`
      InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals(e1);

      // Induction hypothesis for `e2`
      InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals(e2);

      // Proof of the induction step for `Seq`
      InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals_Seq(e1, e2);

    // Omitted
    case ... =>
      ...
}
```

The interesting thing to notice now is that the proof we just sketched above should be the
same whatever the property we wish to prove about the interpreter. In the present case,
the proof of [the induction step for `Seq`](#ind-step-seq-forall) goes through automatically.
The proof for other properties `P` might need a bit more work, but the induction
step is the same: to prove `P` by induction on the expression, in the `Seq` case,
we need the assumption that `P` is true on the elements of the sequence.

> As a consequence, we factorize the proof above in an abstract module, to be able

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a consequence, we can package the proof above in an abstract module, to be able
```

[`P`](#p-predicate) predicate as follows:

```dafny
predicate P_Succ(locals: set<string>, ctx: Context, e: Expr, ctx': Context, v: int)
  // Success: the preconditions are true and we successfully evaluate `e` to
  // a pair (value, new state)
{
  && IsPure_WithLocals(locals, e)
  && ctx.Keys >= locals
  && InterpExpr(e, ctx) == Success((v, ctx'))
  && ctx'.Keys == ctx.Keys
  && forall x | x in ctx.Keys && x !in locals :: ctx'[x] == ctx[x]
}

predicate P_Fail(locals: set<string>, ctx: Context, e: Expr)
  // Failure: the preconditions are false or we fail to evaluate `e`
{
  IsPure_WithLocals(locals, e) ==>
  ctx.Keys >= locals ==>
  InterpExpr(e, ctx).Failure?
}
```

`P_Succ` and `P_Fail` must satisfy the following important property:

```dafny
lemma P_ExcludedMiddle(locals: set<string>, ctx: Context, e: Expr)
  ensures P(locals, ctx, e) <==> P_Fail(locals, ctx, e) || exists ctx', v :: P_Succ(locals, ctx, e, ctx', v)
```

<br>

**Rem.:** in the generic induction principle, we actually don't request the property `P_ExcludedMiddle`
stated as above, but rather ask for the following function and lemmas. The reason is that

> SMT solvers are pretty bad at resolving existential quantifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SMT solvers can have unpredictable performance on existential quantifiers.
```

```dafny
    // Perform a single step of execution provided the execution doesn't fail
    function P_Step(st: S, e: Expr): (res: (S, V))
      requires P(st, e)
      requires !P_Fail(st, e)
      ensures P_Succ(st, e, res.0, res.1)

    lemma P_Fail_Sound(st: S, e: Expr)
      requires P_Fail(st, e)
      ensures P(st, e)

    lemma P_Succ_Sound(st: S, e: Expr, st': S, v: V)
      requires P_Succ(st, e, st', v)
      ensures P(st, e)
```

> <br>

Reviewer: ?

```dafny
// Case 1: evaluating the first element in the sequence fails
lemma InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals_Seq_Fail(locals: set<string>, ctx: Context, e1: Expr, e2: Expr)
  requires P_Fail(locals, ctx, e1)
  ensures P(locals, ctx, Seq(e1, e2))

// Case 2: evaluating the first element in the sequence succeeds
lemma InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals_Seq_Succ(
  locals: set<string>, ctx: Context, e1: Expr, e2: Expr,
  ctx1: Context, v: int)
  requires P_Succ(locals, ctx, e1, ctx1, v) // `e1` evaluates to `v` in `ctx1`
  requires P(locals, ctx1, e2) // The property is true for `e2` starting in `ctx1`
  ensures P(locals, ctx, Seq(e1, e2))
```

This way, the two cases (we fail when evaluating `e1` or not) are decomposed into small
lemmas. Moreover, when proving the result in the 2nd case (the most difficult one in
practice), we can directly reference the `ctx1` variable which is introduced as input to
the lemma.

Finally, the inductive proof of `InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals` requires making a case
disjunction on whether we have `P_Fail(locals, ctx, e1)` or `P_Succ(locals, ctx, e1, ctx1,
v)` for some `ctx1` and `v` (we invite the reader to see the generic proof, for all `P`,
in `Induction.dfy`).

> We invite the reader to have a look at the code development. In practice, proving the

Reviewer: Add a link

correctness of `IsPure` simply required correctly instantiating the various definitions
requested by the induction principle (i.e., `P`): all the proofs go through automatically.
Writing those definitions takes a few lines of code, but is very straightforward. Moreover,
updating the proofs is a lot easier when using the induction principle (see
[`Incrementally expanding the language`](#section-increments)).

## Proofs by induction in an interactive theorem prover (with tactics)

An interesting thing to note is that we have to make our induction principle more precise
than what an interactive theorem prover like Coq would give us. The main reasons we do so
are that we want to consider all the cases in isolation, to make them more tractable, and
we want not to rely on forall quantifiers, because they are hard to work with and make the

> context saturate. More specifically, an interactive prover like Coq would more or less give

Reviewer: ?

us the [first, unrefined induction principle](#ind-step-seq-forall) we introduced earlier.

More specifically, when trying to prove ``InterpExpr_Pure_WithLocals``, we would start
with the goal:

```Coq
GOAL 1:

  ======================================================
  forall (e: Expr) (locals: set<string>) (ctx: Context).
  IsPure_WithLocals(locals, e) ==>
  ctx.Keys >= locals ==>
  match InterpExpr(e, ctx)
    case Success((_, ctx')) =>
      && ctx'.Keys == ctx.Keys
      && forall x | x in ctx.Keys && x !in locals :: ctx'[x] == ctx[x]
    case Failure => true
```

Let's use the [`P`](#p-predicate) predicate for the purpose of clarity. This goal is equivalent to:
```Coq
GOAL 1:

  ========================================================================
  forall (e: Expr) (locals: set<string>) (ctx: Context). P(locals, ctx, e)
  
```

We introduce `e`:
```Coq
GOAL 2:
  e : Expr
  ========================================================================

>   forall (locals: set<string>) (ctx: Context). P(locals, ctx, e)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  forall (locals: set<string>) (ctx: Context), P(locals, ctx, e)
```

      // The rhs doesn't update x
      VarUnchanged(x, bval) &&
      // If the binding doesn't shadow x, the body of the let-binding doesn't update x
      (bvar == x || VarUnchanged(x, body))

    case Assign(avar, aval) =>
      // The variable we update is not x
      avar != x
      // And we don't update x in the rhs
      && VarUnchanged(x, aval)

    // Other cases omitted
    case ... =>
      ...
}

```

The property we want to prove is the following one:
```dafny
forall x, ctx, e ::
  VarUnchanged(x, e) ==>
  x in ctx ==>
  match InterpExpr(e, st.ctx)
    case Success((_, ctx')) =>
      && x in ctx'.Keys // x is also in the new environment
      && ctx'[x] == ctx[x] // x maps to the same value as before
    case Failure =>
      true
  Pre(st, e) ==> ResultSameX(st, res)
```

Because of the potential shadowing appearing in the `Bind` case, we actually can't use this
property directly in the inductive proof. We actually have to make the `x` string optional
(see the code development for the full details). Once this detail properly handled, all the
proofs go through automatically.

<a name="section-increments"></a>
## Incrementally expanding the language

> We set forth to studying how incremental updates to the AST impact the induction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now study how incremental updates to the AST impact the induction
```

predicates (not shown here).

Finally, because `VS` is not a concrete type, we need some constants and lemmas to be provided
by the user.
```dafny
function AppendValue(v: V, vs: VS): VS // Returns: [v] + vs

ghost const NilVS: VS // Empty sequence of values

function VS_Last(vs: VS): V // Last element of a non-empty sequence of values
  requires vs != NilVS
```

The induction lemmas for the `Seq` case are straightforward to update: the only important
thing is that they now sometimes use the `Pes` predicates instead of the `P` predicates
(we don't show those lemmas here).

The last elements we need to add are induction lemmas for `InterpExprs` itself. We define
them as follows:

```dafny
lemma InductExprs_Nil(st: S)
  ensures !Pes_Fail(st, []) ==> Pes_Succ(st, [], st, NilVS)

lemma InductExprs_Cons(st: S, e: Expr, es: seq<Expr>)
  ensures P_Fail(st, e) ==> Pes_Fail(st, [e] + es)
  ensures !P_Fail(st, e) ==> forall st1, v :: P_Succ(st, e, st1, v) && Pes_Fail(st1, es) ==> Pes_Fail(st, [e] + es)
  ensures forall st1, v, st2, vs :: P_Succ(st, e, st1, v) && Pes_Succ(st1, es, st2, vs) ==> Pes_Succ(st, [e] + es, st2, AppendValue(v, vs))
```

> **Rem.**: we grouped several cases in `InductExprs_Cons` and used forall quantifiers. The reason

Reviewer: "Note" rather than "Rem"

`Bind` and `Assign` to allow updating/introducing several variables at once! We do the following
updates in the AST:

```dafny
Bind(bvar: string, bval: Expr, body: Expr)   -->   Bind(bvars: seq<string>, bvals: seq<Expr>, body: Expr)
Assign(avar: string, aval: Expr)             -->   Assign(avars: seq<string>, avals: seq<Expr>)
```

**Rem.:** in the code development, we actually rename `Expr` to `Expr_Raw` and define
`Expr` as a subset type of `Expr_Raw` to enforce the fact that in the `Assign` and `Bind`
cases, we have the same number of variables in the left-hand side as of expressions in
the righ-hand side.

Updating the interpreter and the induction principle is then
straightforward. Interestingly, the proofs using the induction principle (`VarUnchanged`,
`Pure` and `EliminateMulZero`) only require updates to the definitions declared (and not
defined) by the induction principle: none of the proofs break.

As expected, the `PureNoInductionPrinciple` proof requires the `Assign` and `Bind` cases
to be updated.

**Rem.:** if you look at the number of lines of code, you will notice that updating or

> providing the definitions required by the induction principle requires to modify more lines

Reviewer: "requires modifying" or "forces us to modify"
